See also @uref{http://www.dvdrhelp.com/glossary}.

@table @acronym

@item ASPI
@cindex ASPI
See @acronym{Win32 ASPI}

@item ATAPI

Advanced Technology (AT) Attachment Packet Interface. An interface to
support CD Drives and DVD Drives using the computers current IDE
connections.  This is in contrast say to the SCSI protocol.

IDE (also called ATA) was originally designed for hard drives only,
but with help of ATAPI it is possible to connect other devices, in
particular CD-ROMS to the IDE/EIDE connections.

Many ATAPI CD-ROM drives understand a subset of MMC commands. 

@item BIN/CUE

A CD-image format developed by Jeff Arnold for CDRWIN software on
Microsoft Windows. Many other programs subsequently support using this
format. The @code{.CUE} file is a text file which contains CD format
and track layout information, while the @code{.BIN} file holds the
actual data of each track.

@item CD
Compact Disc

@item CD-DA
@cindex CD-DA
Compact Disc Digital Audio, described in the ``Red Book'' or ICE
908. This commonly referred to as an audio @acronym{CD} and what most
people think of when you play a @acronym{CD} as it was the first to
use the @acronym{CD} medium.

@item CD+G
@cindex CD+G

Compact Disc + Graphics. An extension of the CD audio format contains
a limited amount of graphics in subcode channels. This disc works in
all audio players but the graphics portion is only available in a
special CD+G or Karaoke player.

@item CD-i
@cindex CD-i

Compact Disc Interactive. An extension of the CD format designed
around a set-top computer that connects to a TV to provide interactive
home entertainment, including digital audio and video, video games,
and software applications. Defined by the ``Green Book'' standard.
@uref{http://www.icdia.org/}. CD-i for video and video music has
largely (if not totally) been superceded by VCDs.

@item CD-i Bridge
@cindex CD-i Bridge

A standard allowing CD-ROM XA discs to play on CD-i.  Kodak PhotoCDs
are CD-XA Bridge discs.

@item CD-ROM
@cindex CD-ROM

Compact Disc Read Only Memory or ``Yellow Book'' describe in Standards
ISO/IEC 10149. The data stored on it can be either in the form of
audio, computer or video files.

@item CD-ROM Mode 1 and Mode2

The Yellow Book specifies two types of tracks, Mode 1 and Mode 2. Mode
1 is used for computer data and text and has an extra error correction
layer. Mode 2 is for audio and video data and has no extra correction
layer. CD-ROM/XA An expansion of the CD-ROM Mode 2 format that allows
both computer and audio/video to be mixed in the same track.

@item CD Text
@cindex CD Text

CD Text is a technology developed by Sony Corporation and Philips
Electronics in 1996 that allows storing in an audio CD and its tracks
information such as artist name, title, songwriter, composer, or
arranger. Commercially available audio CDs sometimes contain CD Text
information.

@item CD XA
@cindex CD XA

CD-ROM EXtended Architecture. A modification to the CD-ROM
specification that defines two new types of sectors.  CD-ROM XA was
developed jointly by Sony, Philips, and Microsoft, and announced in
August 1988. Its specifications were published in an extension to the
Yellow Book.  CD-i, Photo CD, Video CD and CD-EXTRA have all
subsequently been based on CD-ROM XA.

CD-XA defines another way of formatting sectors on a CD-ROM, including
headers in the sectors that describe the type (audio, video, data) and
some additional info (markers, resolution in case of a video or audio
sector, file numbers, etc).

The data written on a CD-XA is consistent with and can be in ISO-9660
file system format and therefore be readable by ISO-9660 file system
translators. But also a CD-I player can also read CD-XA discs even if
its own `Green Book' file system only resembles ISO 9660 and isn't
fully compatible. 

@item FSF
@cindex FSF

Free Software Foundation, @uref{http://www.fsf.org/}

@item GNU
@cindex GNU

@acronym{GNU} is not @acronym{UNIX}, @uref{http://www.gnu.org/}

@item ISO
@cindex ISO

International Standards Organization. 

@item ISO 9660
@cindex ISO 9660

The ISO 9660 is an operating-system independent filesystem format for
CD-ROM media and DVD-ROMs. It was standardized in 1988 and replaced the
High Sierra standard for the logical format on CD-ROM media (ISO 9660
and High Sierra are identical in content, but the exact format is
different).

There are several specification levels. In Level 1, file names must be
in the 8.3 format (no more than eight characters in the name, no more
than three characters in the suffix) and in capital letters. Directory
names can be no longer than eight characters. There can be no more
than eight nested directory levels. Level 2 and 3 specifications allow
file names up to 32 characters long.

ECMA-119
(@uref{http://www.ecma-international.org/publications/standards/Ecma-119.htm}
is the European specification which is identical to ISO 9660.
ISO 13490 is basically ISO 9660 with multisession support.

@item Joliet extensions
@cindex Joliet extensions

This ISO-9660 upward-compatible standard was developed for Windows 95
and Windows NT by Microsoft as an extension of ISO 9600 which allows
the use of Unicode characters and supports file names up to 64
characters.

See @uref{http://bmrc.berkeley.edu/people/chaffee/jolspec.html} for
the Joliet Specification.

@item LBA
@cindex LBA

Logical Block Addressing. Mapped integer numbers from CD Red Book
Addressing MSF.  The starting sector is -150 and ending sector is
449849, which correlates directly to MSF: 00:00:00 to 99:59:74.
Because an LBA is a single number it is often easier to work with in
programming than an MSF.

@item Lead in
@cindex lead in

The area of a CD where the Table Of Contents (TOC) and CDTEXT are
stored.  I think it is supposed to be around 4500 (1 min) or more
sectors in length.  On a CDR(W) the lead-in length is variable,
because each manufacturer will have a different starting position
indicated by the ATIP start of lead-in position that is recorded in
the ATIP groove on the disk.

@item LSN
@cindex LSN

Logical Sector Number. Mapped integer numbers from CD Red Book
Addressing MSF.  The starting sector is 0 and ending sector is 449699,
which correlates to MSF: 00:00:00 to 99:59:74.  Because an LSN is a
single number it is often easier to work with in programming than an
MSF. Because it starts at 0 rather than -150 as is the case of an LBA
it can be represented as an unsigned value.

@item MCN
@cindex MCN

Media Catalog Number. A identification number on an audio CD.  Also
called a UPC. Another identification number is ISRC.

@item MMC
@cindex MMC (Multimedia Commands)

MMC (Multimedia Commands). A SCSI programming specification made by
the SCSI committee T10 organization @url{http://www.t10.org/}.  MMC
are raw commands for communicating with CDROM drives, CD-Rewriters,
DVD-Rewriters, etc.

Many manufacturers have adopted this standard and it also applies to
ATAPI versions of their drives.

@item Mixed Mode CD
@cindex Mixed Mode CD

A Mixed Mode is a CD that contains tracks of differing CD-ROM Mode
formats. In particular the first track may contain both computer data
(Yellow Book) CD ROM data while the remaining tracks are audio or
video data. Video CD's can be Mixed Mode CDs. 

@item Multisession 
@cindex Multisession 

A way of writing to a CD that allows more data to be
added to readable discs at a later time.

@item Nero NRG format file
@cindex Nero NRG, CD-Image format

A proprietary CD image file format use by a popular program for
Microsoft Windows, Ahead Nero. The specification of this format is
not to our knowlege published. 

@item SCSI 
@cindex SCSI 

Small Computer System Interface.  A set of ANSI standard electronic
interfaces (originally developed at Apple Computer) that allow
personal computers to communicate with peripheral hardware such as
CD-ROM drives, disk drives, printers, etc.

@item SCSI Pass Through Interface.
@cindex SCSI Pass Through Interface.

Yet another way of issuing MMC commands for accessing a CD-ROM. As
with MMC or ASPI, the CD-ROM doesn't necessarily have to be a
SCSI-attached drive. See also @acronym{MMC} and @acronym{ASPI}.

@item Session

A fully readable complete recording that contains one or more tracks
of computer data or audio on a CD.

@item SVCD
@cindex Super VCD (SVCD)

Super @acronym{VCD} 

An improvement of Video CD 2.0 specification which includes most
notably a switch from @acronym{MPEG}-1 (constant bit rate encoding) to
@acronym{MPEG}-2 (variable bit rate encoding) for the video stream.

Also added was higher video-stream resolution, up to 4 overlay
graphics and text (@dfn{OGT}) sub-channels for user switchable
subtitle displaying, closed caption text, and command lists for
controlling the @acronym{SVCD} virtual machine.

See @uref{http://www.dvdrhelp.com/svcd}

@item TOC
@cindex TOC (CD Table of Contents)

(Compact Disc) Table of Contents. The TOC contains the starting track
number, last track number individual track starting time, and some
track flags (copy protection, linear audio preemphasis, track format:
CDDA or data).  Every CD must have at least 1 TOC, the first TOC is
always recorded at the start of the CD (lead-in area).  A
multi-session CD may have several TOCs.

@item Track 
@cindex track

A unit of data of a CD. The size of a track can vary; it can occupy
the entire contents of the CD. Most CD standards however require that
tracks have a 150 frame (or ``2 second'') lead-in gap.

@item VCD
@cindex Video CD (VCD)

The Video Compact Disc (@dfn{Video CD} or @dfn{VCD}) is a standardized
digital video storage format. It is based on the commonly available
Compact Disc technology, which allows for low-cost video authoring.
Video CD's can be played in most @acronym{DVD} standalone player,
dedicated VCD players and finally, modern Personal Computers with
multimedia support.

A Video CD is made up of @acronym{CD-ROM XA} sectors,
i.e. @acronym{CD-ROM} mode 2 form 1 & 2 sectors. Non-@acronym{MPEG} data
is stored in mode 2 form 1 sectors with a user data area of 2048 byte,
which have a similiar L2 error correction and detection
(@acronym{ECC}/@acronym{EDC}) to @acronym{CD-ROM} mode 1 sectors. While
realtime @acronym{MPEG} streams is stored in @acronym{CD-ROM} mode 2
form 2 sectors, which by have no L2 @acronym{ECC}, yield a ~14% greater
user data area consisting of 2324 bytes@footnote{actually raw mode 2
sectors have a 2336 byte user data area, but parts of it are used for
error codes and headers when using the mode 2 form 1 or form 2
configurations.}

@uref{http://www.dvdrhelp.com/vcd}

@item Win32 ASPI
@cindex ASPI

The ASPI interface specification was developed by Adaptec for 
sending commands to a SCSI host adapter (such as those controlling CD
and DVD drives) and used on Window 9x/NT and later. Emulation for
ATAPI drives was added so that the same sets of commands worked those
even though the drives might not be SCSI nor might there even be a
SCSI controller attached.

However in Windows NT/2K/XP, Microsoft provides their Win32 ioctl
interface, and has take steps to make using ASPI more inaccessible
(e.g. requiring adminstrative access to use ASPI).

See also @acronym{MMC}

@item Win32 ioctl driver

Ioctl (Input Output ConTroLs). A Win32 function, implemented in all
Microsoft Windows.  It is used for sending commands to devices using
defined codes and structures.

@item XA
@cindex XA

See @acronym{CD-ROM XA}

@end table
