.TH PCRE-CONFIG 1
.SH NAME
pcre-config - program to return PCRE configuration
.SH SYNOPSIS
.rs
.sp
.B pcre-config  [--prefix] [--exec-prefix] [--version] [--libs]
.ti +5n
.B              [--libs-posix] [--cflags] [--cflags-posix]
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.rs
.sp
\fBpcre-config\fP returns the configuration of the installed PCRE
libraries and the options required to compile a program to use them.
.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.rs
.TP 10
\fB--prefix\fP
Writes the directory prefix used in the PCRE installation for architecture
independent files (\fI/usr\fP on many systems, \fI/usr/local\fP on some
systems) to the standard output.
.TP 10
\fB--exec-prefix\fP
Writes the directory prefix used in the PCRE installation for architecture
dependent files (normally the same as \fB--prefix\fP) to the standard output.
.TP 10
\fB--version\fP
Writes the version number of the installed PCRE libraries to the standard
output.
.TP 10
\fB--libs\fP
Writes to the standard output the command line options required to link
with PCRE (\fB-lpcre\fP on many systems).
.TP 10
\fB--libs-posix\fP
Writes to the standard output the command line options required to link with
the PCRE posix emulation library (\fB-lpcreposix\fP \fB-lpcre\fP on many
systems).
.TP 10
\fB--cflags\fP
Writes to the standard output the command line options required to compile
files that use PCRE (this may include some \fB-I\fP options, but is blank on
many systems).
.TP 10
\fB--cflags-posix\fP
Writes to the standard output the command line options required to compile
files that use the PCRE posix emulation library (this may include some \fB-I\fP
options, but is blank on many systems).
.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.rs
.sp
\fBpcre(3)\fP
.
.
.SH AUTHOR
.rs
.sp
This manual page was originally written by Mark Baker for the Debian GNU/Linux
system. It has been slightly revised as a generic PCRE man page.
.
.
.SH REVISION
.rs
.sp
.nf
Last updated: 18 April 2007
.fi
